Title: Arthur C. Clarke, 16/12/1917 - 18/03/2008: Indistinguishable From Magic
Date: 2008-03-18 23:51
Author: Russell Gray
Slug: Arthur-C-Clarke-Indistinguishable-From-Magic

Sad news - [the legendary Arthur C. Clarke has
died](http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/7304004.stm). He'll be greatly
missed; Clarke novels occupy a full shelf of my floor-to-ceiling
bookcase, and *[Rendezvous With
Rama](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rendezvous_with_rama)* stands proud
as the finest sci-fi it has ever been my pleasure to read.

Aside from his very visible mastery of sci-fi, however, there is much to
remember Clarke for. He is responsible for popularising the concept of
[geostationary orbit](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geostationary_orbit),
which is very important for practical global telecommunications. When
you watch the Olympics on TV this summer, you can thank Clarke for the
fact that you haven't had to go to China to see it.

Perhaps best of all, though, is his now-infamous [Third
Law](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clarke's_three_laws):

> Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.

Clarke's Third Law has been quoted, referenced, and paraphrased
copiously since he coined it, and it is almost axiomatic for many
technologists. As a software engineer, I get a wry enjoyment from Gehm's
Corollary, i.e. "any technology distinguishable from magic is
insufficiently advanced" - a sobering thought when confidently hacking
away on the next big thing!

If your users don't think your software is magic, then you have room for
improvement. I believe Clarke would have approved of that sentiment.
R.I.P.
