Title: C# 3.0, Parallel LINQ, And The Betfair API - An Introduction
Date: 2008-02-23 21:33
Author: Russell Gray
Slug: CSharp-3_0-Parallel-LINQ-And-The-Betfair-API-An-Introduction
Tags: patterns, coding, .net

My pal [Jan](http://londoncoder.wordpress.com/) has a habit of waxing
lyrical about the wonders of [Parallel LINQ](http://blogs.msdn.com/pfxteam/default.aspx) (PLINQ) as soon as you
make the mistake of mentioning multithreading within earshot. I've been
playing around with [.Net 3.5](http://www.microsoft.com/downloads/details.aspx?FamilyID=333325FD-AE52-4E35-B531-508D977D32A6&displaylang=en)
recently, and I write a lot of async code day-to-day when struggling to
keep desktop webservice clients responsive when making lots of
webservice calls, so I thought it high time I took a closer look.

***The Problem***

A key goal for the kind of async work I do is to batch multiple calls
up, so that I get all the responses at once. This is important for
keeping the rest of the code clean. To illustrate, imagine you are
writing an application against the [Betfair API](http://bdp.betfair.com/), and you have a screen that displays a
market, your current profit and loss on that market, and your unmatched
bets on that market. To populate this screen will require four API calls
- getMarket(), getMarketPrices(), getMarketProfitAndLoss(), and
getCurrentBets().

Now, the worst (though easiest) thing to do is make the four calls
sequentially on the UI thread. The problem with this is it's slow, and
the UI freezes during the process (since you're blocking on the UI
thread), which is a lousy user experience.

A slightly better approach is to spin off a thread, and make the four
calls there, raising an event on completion. This gets all the work off
the UI thread and therefore keeps the application responsive, but it's
still slow as the calls are still sequential.

To speed it up, you can create a thread per call (so four threads in
this case). There's a whole lot of complexity around working out the
optimum number of threads to use (depending on how many processors you
have, how many simultaneous connections you are allowed to open, etc)
but that's a bit beyond the scope of this post, so for now we'll go with
the one-thread-per-task approach and assume it's optimal.

So, each thread makes one webservice call, and raises an event to
signify that it's finished. Simple, right? Unfortunately, this can lead
to some real headaches in collating the data.

Imagine a user has hundreds of bets on the market, and therefore the
getCurrentBets() call takes a bit longer to execute than the other
three. The user clicks on a market, and the threads responsible for
getting market data and P&L raise their events quickly, so you display
the screen with the data you have and plan to display the bets as and
when they arrive.

Before the bets are received, however, the user clicks on another
market. Again, the market data and P&L come back quickly and you
display them. Then, finally, the original getCurrentBets() call
completes. But wait! You've moved onto another market now, so you don't
care about those bets any more! So you have to write some code to make
sure that each piece of data received is still relevant. This can become
very onerous very quickly, as you struggle to determine your UI state
and work out what data you want and what should be discarded.

Now imagine that your application has timers firing all over the place
to update prices and P&L on the market every second or two, so you have
events being raised all the time.

I've worked with code that ventured down this path, and believe me, you
don't want to go there.

***The Solution***

The best approach is to batch these calls up, so that each happens on a
separate thread, but only one event is raised - when all of the data has
been received. That way, you can be sure that when you handle the event,
all the data is consistent.

Since this is one of the things that PLINQ does for you, it seems like a
good candidate for kicking the tyres, so to speak. First, though, I'll
do a quick run through of how to do this without PLINQ, for comparison's
sake. The task will be to display a list of all the Premiership matches
available on Betfair at the time the code runs.

***Take Out The Old***

Betfair list Premiership matches grouped by fixture date, under the
Barclays Premiership node in the event tree. It looks something like
this:

    Soccer
        English Soccer
            Barclays Premiership
                Fixtures 23 February
                    Fulham v West Ham
                    Liverpool v Middlesbrough
                    ...
                Fixtures 24 February
                    Blackburn v Bolton
                    Reading v Aston Villa
                Fixtures 25 February
                    Man City v Everton

The Barclays Premiership event node has an ID that doesn't change
(2022802), so I can jump straight to that node and save myself the
bother of having to navigate the Soccer and English Soccer parent nodes.

I'll assume you already know how to create Service References for
Betfair's global WSDL, and skip straight on to creating some useful
helper methods. I need to be able to call getEvents(), obviously:

    :::csharp
    private GetEventsResp GetEvents(int parentEventID)
    {
        return m_global.getEvents(MakeEventRequest(parentEventID)).Result;
    }

    private getEventsIn MakeEventRequest(int parentEventID)
    {
        return new getEventsIn(new GetEventsReq()
            {
                header = new APIRequestHeader()
                {
                    sessionToken = m_sessionToken
                },
                eventParentId = parentEventID
            });
    }

If you're not used to C# 3.0, this is taking advantage of type
initialisation to create nested objects without having to create a bunch
of extra local variables. You can write the exact same method without
type initialisation like this:

    :::csharp
    private getEventsIn MakeEventRequest(int parentEventID)
    {
        APIRequestHeader header = new APIRequestHeader();
        header.sessionToken = m_sessionToken;
        GetEventsReq req = new GetEventsReq();
        req.header = header;
        req.eventParentId = parentEventID;
        return new getEventsIn(req);
    }

The first thing I need to do is get a list of fixture nodes. I can do
this by asking for child events of the Premiership node, and filtering
for the events that start with the word 'Fixture'. This can be achieved
with a simple regex and a bit of normal LINQ:

    :::csharp
    private List<BFEvent> GetPremiershipFixtureEvents()
    {
        return GetEvents(PREMIERSHIP).eventItems.Where(
            (ev, idx) => Regex.IsMatch(ev.eventName, "^Fixtures.*")
            ).ToList();
    }

Assume PREMIERSHIP is a const int with the value 2022802. The Where()
method works as a filter - you pass it a delegate, and it executes that
delegate against each member of the list and returns a new list
containing only the elements for which the delegate returned true.

In this case, I'm creating the delegate with a lambda expression, which
returns true for elements with an event name that is matched by the
regex.

Now I've got the fixture events, I need to get the child events of each,
which correspond to the actual matches. I want each call to be
asynchronous so that they happen in parallel, rather than sequentially.
I also want to wait for all calls to complete before continuing, so I
use the WaitHandle.WaitAll() method:

    :::csharp
    private List<BFEvent> GetMatchEvents(List<BFEvent> fixtureDateEvents)
    {
        List<BFEvent> matchEvents = new List<BFEvent>();
        var callbacks = (
            from ev in fixtureDateEvents
            select StartGetEvents(ev.eventId, matchEvents)
            ).ToList();
        WaitHandle.WaitAll(callbacks.ConvertAll(
                    ar => ar.AsyncWaitHandle).ToArray());
        return matchEvents;
    }

Here, the LINQ expression and the ConvertAll() method call are doing
similar things - converting all elements of a list into another type. In
the case of the LINQ expression, I am effectively obtaining a list of
IAsyncResult objects by calling StartGetEvents() on each event in my
list and storing the return value of each call. In the case of the
ConvertAll() call, I am obtaining a list of WaitHandle objects by
accessing the AsyncWaitHandle property of each IAsyncResult object in
the list.

It is perfectly possible to replace the LINQ expression with a call to
ConvertAll(), or the ConvertAll() call with another LINQ expression.
Which one you use in cases like this is largely a matter of preference.

The StartGetEvents() method needs to make an asynchronous webservice
call and append the results to the provided list. Since multiple threads
are accessing the list, the write must be protected with a lock:

    :::csharp
    private IAsyncResult StartGetEvents(int parentEventID,
        List<BFEvent> matchEvents)
    {
        return m_global.BegingetEvents(MakeEventRequest(parentEventID),
            delegate(IAsyncResult ar)
            {
                lock (matchEvents)
                {
                    matchEvents.AddRange(
                        m_global.EndgetEvents(ar).Result.eventItems);
                }
            },
            m_global);
    }

I am using an anonymous delegate for the callback here. All it does is
lock the list and add the events contained in the response. Note that in
production code you might want to be a bit more diligent about locking
strategies and so on - I've written the code like this for conciseness,
not necessarily for production-grade correctness.

Now the whole shebang can be invoked very simply:

    :::csharp
    var fixtures = GetPremiershipFixtureEvents();
    GetMatchEvents(fixtures).ForEach(e => Console.WriteLine(e.eventName));

Note that the calling code is very clean and simple, and doesn't care
about threads or anything like that - all that async plumbing is nicely
contained in the GetMatchEvents() and StartGetEvents() methods.

***Bring In The New***

So how can PLINQ help with this? Well, it lets me get rid of those
GetMatchEvents() and StartGetEvents() methods, which contain all the
fiddly async code and are easily the most complex methods in the code
above.

First, I'll create a simple task class which represents the task of
getting events for a particular ID:

    :::csharp
    public class GetEventsTask
    {
        private int m_parentEventID;
        private string m_sessionToken;

        public GetEventsTask(string sessionToken, int parentEventID)
        {
            m_sessionToken = sessionToken;
            m_parentEventID = parentEventID;
        }

        public List<BFEvent> GetEvents()
        {
            BFGlobalService svc = new BFGlobalServiceClient();
            APIRequestHeader header = new APIRequestHeader()
                { sessionToken = m_sessionToken };
            return new List<BFEvent>(svc.getEvents(
                new getEventsIn(new GetEventsReq()
                {
                    eventParentId = m_parentEventID,
                    header = header
                })).Result.eventItems);
        }
    }


Once I've instantiated an instance of this class, a call to GetEvents()
will get me all the child events for the specified parent node.

To use PLINQ, all I have to do is create an array of these task objects
- one per fixture date - and use the AsParallel() extension method to
specify that I want the task processing done in parallel:

    :::csharp
    GetEventsTask[] tasks = (
            from ev in fixtureDateEvents
            select new GetEventsTask(m_sessionToken, ev.eventId)
            ).ToArray();
    var taskResults = (
            from t in tasks.AsParallel()
            select t.GetEvents()
            ).ToList();

Neat, eh? Note that PLINQ will also take care of deciding the optimal
number of threads, neatly sidestepping the work I alluded to earlier.

One wrinkle is that my PLINQ statement results in a list of lists, so I
need to flatten it out before returning.

    :::csharp
    List matchEvents = new List();
    taskResults.ForEach(results => matchEvents.AddRange(results));

Obviously this is only scratching the surface, not only of PLINQ but of
LINQ itself. Much more powerful expressions can be created with a little
tweaking of the objects generated from the Betfair WSDL - but that's a
topic for another article.
